What is AI? 
Artificial intelligence (AI) is technology that enables computers and machines to simulate human learning, comprehension, problem solving, decision making, creativity and autonomy.

Applications and devices equipped with AI can see and identify objects. They can understand and respond to human language. They can learn from new information and experience. They can make detailed recommendations to users and experts. They can act independently, replacing the need for human intelligence or intervention (a classic example being a self-driving car).

But in 2024, most AI researchers, practitioners and most AI-related headlines are focused on breakthroughs in generative AI (gen AI), a technology that can create original text, images, video and other content. To fully understand generative AI, it’s important to first understand the technologies on which generative AI tools are built: machine learning (ML) and deep learning.

Machine learning
A simple way to think about AI is as a series of nested or derivative concepts that have emerged over more than 70 years:

Diagram comparing diferent types of machine learning concepts as nested boxes in bluish hues.
How artificial intelligence, machine learning, deep learning and generative AI are related.
Directly underneath AI, we have machine learning, which involves creating models by training an algorithm to make predictions or decisions based on data. It encompasses a broad range of techniques that enable computers to learn from and make inferences based on data without being explicitly programmed for specific tasks.

There are many types of machine learning techniques or algorithms, including linear regression, logistic regression, decision trees, random forest, support vector machines (SVMs), k-nearest neighbor (KNN), clustering and more. Each of these approaches is suited to different kinds of problems and data.

But one of the most popular types of machine learning algorithm is called a neural network (or artificial neural network). Neural networks are modeled after the human brain's structure and function. A neural network consists of interconnected layers of nodes (analogous to neurons) that work together to process and analyze complex data. Neural networks are well suited to tasks that involve identifying complex patterns and relationships in large amounts of data.

The simplest form of machine learning is called supervised learning, which involves the use of labeled data sets to train algorithms to classify data or predict outcomes accurately. In supervised learning, humans pair each training example with an output label. The goal is for the model to learn the mapping between inputs and outputs in the training data, so it can predict the labels of new, unseen data.

Join over 100,000 subscribers who read the latest news in tech
Stay up to date on the most important—and intriguing—industry trends on AI, automation, data and beyond with the Think Newsletter, delivered twice weekly. See the IBM Privacy Statement.

First name*
Last name*
Business email*
Your subscription will be delivered in English. You will find an unsubscribe link in every newsletter. Refer to our IBM Privacy Statement for more information.
Subscribe
Deep learning
Deep learning is a subset of machine learning that uses multilayered neural networks, called deep neural networks, that more closely simulate the complex decision-making power of the human brain.

Deep neural networks include an input layer, at least three but usually hundreds of hidden layers, and an output layer, unlike neural networks used in classic machine learning models, which usually have only one or two hidden layers.

These multiple layers enable unsupervised learning: they can automate the extraction of features from large, unlabeled and unstructured data sets, and make their own predictions about what the data represents.

Because deep learning doesn’t require human intervention, it enables machine learning at a tremendous scale. It is well suited to natural language processing (NLP), computer vision, and other tasks that involve the fast, accurate identification complex patterns and relationships in large amounts of data. Some form of deep learning powers most of the artificial intelligence (AI) applications in our lives today.

A diagram showing how data is processed in a deep neural network
In a deep neural network, multiple layers of nodes can extract meaning and relationships from large volumes of unstructured, unlabeled data.
Deep learning also enables:

Semi-supervised learning, which combines supervised and unsupervised learning by using both labeled and unlabeled data to train AI models for classification and regression tasks.

Self-supervised learning, which generates implicit labels from unstructured data, rather than relying on labeled data sets for supervisory signals.

Reinforcement learning, which learns by trial-and-error and reward functions rather than by extracting information from hidden patterns.

Transfer learning, in which knowledge gained through one task or data set is used to improve model performance on another related task or different data set.

AI vs Machine Learning
AI vs Machine Learning (5:49 min)
Generative AI
Generative AI, sometimes called "gen AI", refers to deep learning models that can create complex original content such as long-form text, high-quality images, realistic video or audio and more in response to a user’s prompt or request.

At a high level, generative models encode a simplified representation of their training data, and then draw from that representation to create new work that’s similar, but not identical, to the original data.

Generative models have been used for years in statistics to analyze numerical data. But over the last decade, they evolved to analyze and generate more complex data types. This evolution coincided with the emergence of three sophisticated deep learning model types:

Variational autoencoders or VAEs, which were introduced in 2013, and enabled models that could generate multiple variations of content in response to a prompt or instruction.

Diffusion models, first seen in 2014, which add "noise" to images until they are unrecognizable, and then remove the noise to generate original images in response to prompts.

Transformers (also called transformer models), which are trained on sequenced data to generate extended sequences of content (such as words in sentences, shapes in an image, frames of a video or commands in software code). Transformers are at the core of most of today’s headline-making generative AI tools, including ChatGPT and GPT-4, Copilot, BERT, Bard and Midjourney.
Outside view of a commercial building
2026 Buyer's Guide for IBM's AI agents and assistants
The future of AI is evolving fast, but one thing is clear: tech leaders must act now to prepare their teams and organizations for success. Adopting AI tools like assistants and agents is a critical first step.


Get started
How generative AI works
In general, generative AI operates in three phases:

Training, to create a foundation model.
Tuning, to adapt the model to a specific application.
Generation, evaluation and more tuning, to improve accuracy.
Training
Generative AI begins with a "foundation model"; a deep learning model that serves as the basis for multiple different types of generative AI applications.

The most common foundation models today are large language models (LLMs), created for text generation applications. But there are also foundation models for image, video, sound or music generation, and multimodal foundation models that support several kinds of content.

To create a foundation model, practitioners train a deep learning algorithm on huge volumes of relevant raw, unstructured, unlabeled data, such as terabytes or petabytes of data text or images or video from the internet. The training yields a neural network of billions of parameters encoded representations of the entities, patterns and relationships in the data that can generate content autonomously in response to prompts. This is the foundation model.

This training process is compute-intensive, time-consuming and expensive. It requires thousands of clustered graphics processing units (GPUs) and weeks of processing, all of which typically costs millions of dollars. Open source foundation model projects, such as Meta's Llama-2, enable gen AI developers to avoid this step and its costs.

Tuning
Next, the model must be tuned to a specific content generation task. This can be done in various ways, including:

Fine-tuning, which involves feeding the model application-specific labeled data, questions or prompts the application is likely to receive, and corresponding correct answers in the wanted format.

Reinforcement learning with human feedback (RLHF), in which human users evaluate the accuracy or relevance of model outputs so that the model can improve itself. This can be as simple as having people type or talk back corrections to a chatbot or virtual assistant.
Generation, evaluation and more tuning
Developers and users regularly assess the outputs of their generative AI apps, and further tune the model even as often as once a week for greater accuracy or relevance. In contrast, the foundation model itself is updated much less frequently, perhaps every year or 18 months.

Another option for improving a gen AI app's performance is retrieval augmented generation (RAG), a technique for extending the foundation model to use relevant sources outside of the training data to refine the parameters for greater accuracy or relevance.